W-15534103 pdk timer feature gr (#563)
mulesoft/docs-gateway: pdk/1.1/modules/ROOT/pages/policies-pdk-configure-features-timer.adoc

= Configuring Delayed, Periodic, and Synchronous Functions
ifndef::env-site,env-github[]
include::_attributes.adoc[]
endif::[]
:imagesdir: ../assets/images

> PDK provides the `Clock` injectable to build timers to enable delayed, periodic, and synchronous functions.

Reviewer: only one timer can be built

   Configuration(bytes): Configuration,
   clock: Clock, // Inject the clock to be able to launch async tasks.
   client: HttpClient,
) -> Result<()> {

   // set the period between ticks of the timer.
   let timer = clock.period(Duration::from_secs(10));
----

After you inject the timer, share a reference of the `timer` with the `on_request` and `on_response` functions to begin creating delayed functions:

[source,rust]
----
    launcher
        .launch(on_request(|rs| request_filter(rs, &timer, &config)))
        .await?;
----

You can now await timer functions in `on_request` and `on_response` functions, for example:

[source,rust]
----
    let slept = timer.sleep(duration).await;
    let tick = timer.next_tick().await;
----

NOTE: To view an example policy project that launches delayed functions, see https://github.com/mulesoft/pdk-custom-policy-examples/blob/main/spike/README.md[Spike Policy Example].

== Launch Asynchronous Tasks

Use the timer to execute tasks independent of the request flow. To execute asynchronous tasks:

. Define your task inside an `async` function.
. In the policy configuration function call your function but don't await the returned future.

> . In the policy configuration function call the `launch` function with the `on_response` filer functions but don't await the returned future.

Reviewer: typo on filter.
on_request && on_response? or request handling filter

= Configuring Delayed, Periodic, and Synchronous Functions
ifndef::env-site,env-github[]
include::_attributes.adoc[]
endif::[]
:imagesdir: ../assets/images

> PDK provides the `Clock` injectable to build a timer to enable delayed, periodic, and synchronous functions. Each policy only supports one timer.

Reviewer 2: Just checking - PDK is an acceptable initialism? Should we expand on first mention?

Reviewer 2: Can you flip this to put the customer value first?

Reviewer 2: Something like "Use the Clock injectable to build a timer to...."

> PDK provides the `Clock` injectable to build a timer to enable delayed, periodic, and synchronous functions. Each policy only supports one timer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
PDK provides the `Clock` injectable to build a timer to enable delayed, periodic, and synchronous functions. Each policy supports only one timer.
```

Each timer provides the following two functions:

[source,rust]
----
pub async fn next_tick(&self) -> bool;
pub async fn sleep(&self, interval: Duration) -> bool;
----

* `next_tick`: Sleeps for the minimum amount of time the timer is capable of distinguishing.
* `sleep`: Sleeps for an amount of ticks where the elapsed time is greater or equal than the provided `Duration`. For example, if you configure the period of the clock to 10 seconds, calling `timer.sleep(Duration::from_secs(1))` sleeps for 10 seconds.

> Both functions return `true` when the specified time has passed or false if the policy is unapplied or edited during execution.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Both functions return `true` when the specified time has passed or `false` if the policy is unapplied or edited during execution.
```

== Configure the Timer

To inject a `timer` in your policy, insert a `Clock` into your policy configuration function and define a timer with a time period:

[source,rust]
----
#[entrypoint]
async fn configure(
   launcher: Launcher,
   Configuration(bytes): Configuration,
   clock: Clock, // Inject the clock to be able to launch async tasks.
   client: HttpClient,
) -> Result<()> {

   // set the period between ticks of the timer.
   let timer = clock.period(Duration::from_secs(10));
----

> After you inject the timer, share a reference of the `timer` with the `on_request` and `on_response` functions to begin creating delayed functions:

Reviewer 2: Is "reference of" correct here?

Author: Yes

[source,rust]
----
    launcher
        .launch(on_request(|rs| request_filter(rs, &timer, &config)))
        .await?;
----

> You can now await timer functions in `on_request` and `on_response` functions, for example:

Reviewer 2: Should timer be in mono font?

Author: I don't think so. It's more of a feature of PDK rather than something in the code. You could name a timer anything, but timer makes the most sense. I'm sorry if that's confusing.

Author: Also, I thin reference of is fine. It's a reference to the timer, I don't really know how to phrase it.

Reviewer 2: OK, it's just that it's in mono font on line 24.

Author: Ahh, yeah, that's confusing. I'll change the above.

[source,rust]
----
    let slept = timer.sleep(duration).await;
    let tick = timer.next_tick().await;
----

NOTE: To view an example policy project that launches delayed functions, see https://github.com/mulesoft/pdk-custom-policy-examples/blob/main/spike/README.md[Spike Policy Example].

== Launch Asynchronous Tasks

Use the timer to execute tasks independent of the request flow. To execute asynchronous tasks:

. Define your task inside an `async` function.

> . In the policy configuration function call your function but don't await the returned future.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. In the policy configuration function, call your function but don't await the returned future.
```

> . In the policy configuration function call the `launch` function with the `on_request` and `on_response` filter functions but don't await the returned future.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. In the policy configuration function, call the `launch` function with the `on_request` and `on_response` filter functions but don't await the returned future.
```

> . Use the `join!` macro to await both futures of your task function and `launch` function at the same time. 

Reviewer 2: Just checking - these instructions are sequential?

Author: Yes

+

> NOTE: To use the `join` macro, add the ‘futures’ crates as dependency in your `cargo.toml` file.

Reviewer 2: Is "crates" correct here?

Reviewer 2: It seems like, if "crate" is the correct word, it would be singular?

Author: Sorry, it was changed in the doc and the comment was outdated so it wasn't appearing in the file.

Each worker executes a copy of the task. Configure a loop inside the function to execute periodic tasks. For example, the following code example awaits both functions:

[source,rust]
----
let task = my_async_task(&timer, &config);
let launched = launcher.launch(filter);
let joined = join!(launched, task);
----

> Add a loop to the `my_async_task` function creates periodic tasks, for example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Adding a loop to the `my_async_task` function creates periodic tasks, for example:
```

[source,rust]
----
async fn my_async_task(timer: &Timer, config: &Config) {
    // While the policy is still running.
    // Wait for the next cycle.
    while timer.next_tick().await {
        // Execute periodic task
    }
}
----

> To launch multiple asynchronous tasks, send a reference of the timer to your `async` functions and join them with the `launch` task, for example:

Reviewer 2: "reference of"

[source,rust]
----
let task1 = my_async_task1(&timer, &config);
let task2 = my_async_task2(&timer, &config);
let launched = launcher.launch(filter);
let joined = join!(launched, task1, task2);
----

> NOTE: To view an example policy project that launches asynchronous periodic tasks, see https://github.com/mulesoft/pdk-custom-policy-examples/blob/main/metrics/README.md[Metrics Policy Example^].

Reviewer 2: No need to add the "^" anymore - antora takes care of it. OK to leave, but just fyi.

== Sync Asynchronous Tasks between Workers

> PDK provides the `LockBuilder` to sync workers. The lock ensures that only one worker is completing a task in a time period. Each policy supports multiple locks.

Reviewer 2: Flip to put user value first? Use the PDK Lockbuilder to sync workers...

> Locks are useful when a policy consumes an HTTP service that has usage limits. A single worker can fetch data and then share the data with other workers to reduce service requests.

Reviewer 2: Nice.

To configure a lock:

. Inject the `LockBuilder` into your policy configuration function:
+
[source,rust]
----
#[entrypoint]
async fn configure(
    launcher: Launcher,
    Configuration(bytes): Configuration,
    clock: Clock,        // Inject the clock to be able to launch async tasks.
    lock: LockBuilder,   // Inject the lock to be able to synchronize the workers.
) -> Result<()> {
----

. Configure the lock and share a reference to it with your asynchronous function:
+
[source,rust]
----
    let lock = lock
        .new(ID.to_string())
        .expiration(Duration::from_secs(20))
        .build();
    let task = my_async_task(&timer, &lock);
----
+

> If the asynchronous task that executes `async` function calls, configure the `expiration` of the lock to a value bigger than the total time needed to complete the nested `async` function calls.

Reviewer 2: Something is missing (or extra) from this sentence. Read aloud.

. Inside the asynchronous function, acquire the lock before executing the desired task. If no other worker has the lock, the current worker acquires the lock. Otherwise, you must omit the execution of the task and wait for the next task loop, for example:
+
[source,rust]
----
async fn my_async_task(
    timer: &Timer,
    lock: &TryLock,
) {
   while timer.next_tick().await {
     if let Some(acquired) = lock.try_lock() {
       // execute task.
     }
   }
}
----
+

> After obtaining the lock, if you execute code that requires you ‘await’ a result, you must call the `refresh_lock` function to ensure the lock hasn’t expired. If the lock has expired, the worker is considered unresponsive. Abort the execution of your task as another worker has begun the same task execution

Reviewer 2: I can't find it in the Style Guide, but I think we avoid using function names as verbs in the sentence.

> After obtaining the lock, if you execute code that requires you ‘await’ a result, you must call the `refresh_lock` function to ensure the lock hasn’t expired. If the lock has expired, the worker is considered unresponsive. Abort the execution of your task as another worker has begun the same task execution

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After obtaining the lock, if you execute code that requires you ‘await’ a result, you must call the `refresh_lock` function to ensure the lock hasn’t expired. If the lock has expired, the worker is considered unresponsive. Abort the execution of your task because another worker is running the same task execution.
```
